Warm greetings, friends. Welcome back. So, as usual, we'll just begin with reconnecting
to our motivation, this genuine, heartfelt love and compassion for all beings, this Bodhichitta.
We're taking this time to pay attention to what's vitally important in our lives. So
we're going to temporarily put aside just kind of other things and create a little space,
a little pause and time to be with the Buddha Dharma and to open our hearts to it and to
kind of hone our attention on the Dharma and just let that kind of be the atmosphere we're
going to be in here for a few minutes together. So we activate this Bodhichitta and then kind
of relax into also this pure perception, as Rinpoche has talked about so many times, is
a key point of Vajrayana practice. So we'll just do that for a moment.
Thank you. So this has been an interesting topic for me to consider this time. So I'd
like to try to give myself a little bit of a kind of like sandbox to try to have to orient
within for these really brief kind of Dharma talks. And so the title for this one, I just
kind of came up with is the easy path of Vajrayana, using limitations for liberation. So the easy
path of Vajrayana Buddhism, how do we use limitations for enlightenment? And I was thinking
this morning, shoveling manure and soil. And I thought to myself, day by day, kind of considering
this topic, what makes Vajrayana the easy path? Because it's a statement that's really
proclaimed far and wide in the lineage tradition. Vajrayana is the swift and easy path. And
what I came to this morning is this topic for me is more like a love letters to Vajrayana.
Kind of like all the ways that I'm kind of dazzled by the exceptional, extraordinary
qualities of Tibetan Buddhism and the little bit I know about it. So the topic today is
kind of what makes this easy. In the past few kind of times, I've seemed to be like on
a little bit of a cycle of giving warnings. Like, this requires us to really show up for
Vajrayana practice and we have to keep going. And we have to keep checking in with ourselves
and we have to be willing to receive feedback from other people and including and especially
like a teacher or a guru that we're connected with. All the ways that we can't blame life
for happening to us but we have to actually utilize life in order to flourish. So I've
kind of been on a little bit of a trajectory of that flavor. And so I thought to mention
also just the beautiful bounty of Vajrayana too. And so this is more like a letter or
like a, this is giving me some little space because this is more like poetry and less
like a technical analysis. So I have my own kind of reflections and then I'll base it
in like lineage text too. And some of what I'm going to say is maybe like unconventional
but also really obvious in a certain view. So the easy path of Vajrayana. So I think
I came to the point in my mind and I've come to it like again and again a bit. The point
is one point is that Tibetan Buddhism has nothing to do with Tibet. I think this is
like such a big point that is again and again proclaimed by lineage masters and Longchenpa
in his, one of his seven treasuries, the treasury of philosophical systems. I think it's chapter
one. He's going over the history of Buddhism and in that teaching by Longchenpa, he very
clearly talks about how Vajrayana was fully taught by Buddhist acumeni in India before
it went to Tibet. And if you look at his more subtle level history of Tibetan Buddhism in
that same chapter, how the Buddha was enlightened a long time before he was enlightened in India
eons ago and how then he turned the wheel of Dharma, Vajrayana Dharma. Just yesterday
Venerable Kempa Ramache is talking about how Amitabha became enlightened 10 days ago. Buddha
Amitabha was enlightened 10 days ago according to his time frame in Dehuachen and for human
years that's 10,000 eons ago. So Vajrayana happened a long time before this world system,
before Tibet, before India, before language here, before any artifacts we have, any empirical
data we're going to get on it. There are just so many tantras and sutras that go over the
vast, extensive cosmological history of Tibetan Buddhism with a lot of detail. So that said,
somehow we have the incredible great fortune that the Buddha came at this time, some 600
or so, or 2,500, 2,600 years ago. In India he turned the wheel of Dharma. Guru Rinpoche
appeared, manifested in India, took the full Vajrayana teachings to Tibet. That was firmly
established by the great Dharma King Tristan Detsen, Shantrakshita and Guru Padmasambhava.
That's around the 8th century that it's been an uninterrupted living lineage that has not
broken up until this very present moment and it's continuing with all these lineage masters.
It's a big thing nowadays to try to find a transformative method that's really accessible,
that's really human, that's really organic, that's totally scalable with so many big problems
we have. How can humans make, how can we be friends, right? Get a lot of humans together,
how do you get them to not kill each other when it's a lot of them? That is a problem
that has been plaguing human civilization for millennia, but Tibet is an example of how
to do it. They were able to do this with Tibetan Buddhism in Tibet, Vajrayana coming into Tibet,
all these decentralized hubs of nunneries and monasteries and look at how many enlightened
beings Tibetan Buddhism produced in Tibet. There are so many that we know about, let
alone the ones we don't know about or can't perceive ourselves. This entire culture became
oriented around bodhicitta is the beginning, all beings have Buddha nature. The best thing
someone can do in this life is get enlightenment so they can serve effectively all beings forever.
That became like a cultural norm and of course Tibet is not a homogenous culture just like
no culture is. All the Tibetan people aren't the same, they're just people. So just because
we can take some lens and look at all this was wrong and that was wrong and this is wrong
and that was wrong, that's great, you know, honestly that's really impressive. It's important
to look at power dynamics and to see who has power and who doesn't, but that's the first
noble truth. There's suffering, it's not all perfect. So we need to highlight suffering
but then we can't forget there's a second noble truth, third noble truth, fourth noble
truth too. Okay, so we can diagnose the situation as being very difficult in certain ways system
ically
or just in little points, but so what do we do? What's the path? How can we prevent it?
How can we heal it? How can we overcome it? How can we liberate this problem of suffering?
The Buddha taught this so long ago and it's been taught way before our enlightened system
or this system here, this world system. So Tibetan Buddhism has nothing to do with Tibet
and yet Tibet should be honored with folded hands just like Mother India as a look at
all these Tibetans that have done it, look at all these Indians that have done it, look
at all these people from all around who've applied these teachings and gotten the fruit,
re-achieved Bumis, like actually become liberated Aryan noble beings and let alone go through
the Bumis, become fully awakened enlightened beings that will serve other beings perfectly
for the rest of time and space. It's really well worth us like taking a humble position
and saying, "Oh, how did they do this? How did this work?" And so that's kind of a point
of what we're doing here. How does Tibetan Buddhism work? Like why is it worthy of respect?
Why is it like, "How did it do this?" And let alone big claims of being the easy path.
Tibet produced all these enlightened beings and even if we don't believe enlightenment,
which is a really funny idea for a Buddhist, if you don't believe in enlightenment and
you're here, this is an interesting thing to consider how that's possible. But say we
put that aside. What's the way we begin every session? Borichitta. What if that was a common
human standard? Okay, before we say something, arouse Borichitta. Oh, before we learn something,
arouse Borichitta. Before we make art, arouse Borichitta. Before we go to our job, arouse
Borichitta. Think of how high level, how mature, like how amazing a technique for that to become
a cultural norm. For us now to be trying to, we're reproducing that culture. We're in that.
We're trying to hold ourselves accountable to that standard, such a high standard where
really everyone is included, no one's left out. We can't put anyone on the side. Everyone
has to be allowed in. No one will ever be left out. That's Sutra Mahayana. This is the heart
of Tantra Mahayana. How amazing to just take a moment to pause and activate Borichitta in
ourselves and all of a sudden things get a lot easier, don't they? They definitely do
for me. Take a moment to pause. Reactivate compassion. Have more Borichitta come out.
Really a deep, genuine love for beings. Just for a moment or two. I mean, it softens everything.
Everything just kind of sets into place just a little bit, let alone have that be something
we experience moment by moment, hour by hour, day by day, year by year. That's what we're
all practicing for. That's what we're all studying, to be in the space of Borichitta
all the time. That's what this whole path is about. If we can do that, then Vajrayana
becomes easy. That's kind of point one. I think a separate point is, I think being
able to use Tibetan Buddhism or Vajrayana requires many things in Rinpoche, Venerable
Kenpo San Antonio Rinpoche, Rinpoche as well. They've gone over this list of what makes
a qualified teacher and what makes a qualified student many, many times. And Jigme Lingpa
is taught on it. I say their names quickly because the list is so long. All these noble
beings taught on what, especially for us as students, what makes us appropriate vessels.
One way we can say that, what makes us ready? How do we ready ourselves for Vajrayana? And
one thing I think is really simple, there's a few things, but that's really, really simple
is open-mindedness. Maybe. Just that idea. Maybe. Could the Tibetan Buddhism have been
taught before this world system happened? Maybe. For the Big Bang, maybe. Can we heal
each other with light? Maybe. I don't know, maybe. Could bodhicitta arise this moment?
Maybe. Because in Sutra Mahayana, they think it takes eons. That Buddha taught it takes
a long time to have an actual authentic moment of bodhicitta. But in Tantra Mahayana, it
says it can happen right now. Is that possible? Maybe. Could it be that I'm not a bad person?
Could it be that you're actually good? Could it be that the world's really workable? Could
it be that Amitabha's pure land is in the West? Could it be that it's the easiest thing
to get into Adewa Chen by offering a flower to the West with genuine intention and certainty
please may all beings be reborn in circumstances that utterly flourish and support their
enlightenment
forever in Adewa Chen? Is that possible? Maybe. If our answer is not a pretty, loose, easy
to happen, maybe, then we really need to look at that. Because Vajrayana really requires
an open mind. There's a lotus on a bed of flames with a sun and a moon and forearms.
And, I mean, if we don't consider this with a little flexibility of imaginative mind,
what are we doing? Maybe. Because it doesn't work without that. It just doesn't work. If
we really come to Vajrayana and think, "I know how this works. I don't need to learn
anything else." It just won't work. And it's even harder if we practice Vajrayana a long
time and that's where we get to, "Oh, I know everything. I don't need to learn anything
else. I'm done. I know it all." That's much more dangerous. They call it a leather bag
that holds butter. It's soft on the inside but brittle on the outside. It's very easy
to break. It becomes a poison vessel. We can't receive the nutrition of Dharma anymore because
we just kept it up here and we didn't try to become it. And the more we do that, the
stronger the habit gets. The more impervious we become to receiving the Dharma to consider,
"Oh, maybe. Maybe this is true. Maybe it's possible. Maybe enlightenment in a lifetime
is possible. Maybe. Maybe all sounds arise as the mandala is like pure enlightened mantra.
Maybe. Maybe I don't even have to say a mantra. The mantra is already there resounding, self-res
ounding,
right? Because that's like what the teaching says we should try to do. Let the mantra be
there. We're not making it be there. We're just seeing, "Oh, it's there. Oh, I'll just
allow it to be doing what it's doing and I won't get in its way." That's pure view. Maybe.
Without that flexibility of mind, without really genuinely considering a much more of
a both/and kind of perspective. Not this way, not that way. What is Madhyamaka all about?
I mean, really, I'm throwing around some terms because sometimes it's good to just get into
the meat of these things. What's Madhyamaka Middleweight teaching is all about? I mean,
the Nogarjan has said, "The highest view is the one that grasps onto no view. Go beyond
all views to not take a position with any kind of rigidity or fixation or false certainty.
This is the way it is." Because Vajrayana is intentionally designed to completely destroy
that. This is the way it is. Vajrayana is completely designed to uproot our duality
clinging and we've heard it so many times and so any time it comes up a sense of, "I
know this. I'm right. This is right," and then it gets tenser and our blood pressure
goes up and we start pointing fingers. This is not a Madhyamaka view. So how could it
be a Vajrayana view? Madhyamaka has to be included in Vajrayana. That's what all the
teachers said. If we're really in the nature of mind, if someone's really abiding in flexible
open awareness, how can you get into some big fight and be angry? If you're really in
it, because all the teachings on Vajrayana may being the easy path and there's a list
of them. Venerable Kempa Rinpoche's, they talk about it in their Outer Tantra book.
The 15 distinctions between the Sutrajana and the Tantrayana. They excerpt it from the
Chakra-Zambara Tantra. They go through the 15 points that proclaim why Vajrayana is greater
than Sutrajana and this is really key here. Not against Sutrajana. It's not either/or.
It's both/and. It's Sutrajana plus, just like it's foundational Buddhism plus and if really
for all of us, if we've come to that point of understanding already, yes, we're learning.
If we still think of Hanyanas against Mahayanas against Vajrayana, this is completely not
a Dharma teaching. They're all unified together in the synthesis. So in these teachings, the
15 distinctions between Sutrajana and Vajrayana, then they're distilled into the four condensed
points of what makes Vajrayana so amazing and they all come down to directly recognizing
the nature of mind. All of them. And I have no ability to say anything about that. But
they're living lineage masters that can and they do and they are and they're still here
and we can connect to them and we can work with them. And there are these living teachings
of Vajrayana that are exactly suitable to whatever we're ready for that will help us
see our mind. What is our mind truly? The nature of our mind without all this fixation
and hang ups and expectations and hopes and fears and aversions and all the things. That's
just samsaric mind. So if we're really serious about Vajrayana, which I mean, you know, on
occasion I am, most of the time I'm wasting my time. But in a moment of being serious
about Vajrayana, then we really have to take that seriously. If it's possible, if maybe
it's true the nature of mind is actually the way the Buddha taught about it. Being free
and open. It's filled with bodhicitta. The simple way of saying it's just bodhicitta
just come out. It's all the time it's bodhicitta, you know. If that could be true, that is the
only thing that will liberate us from samsara. So many teachers teach on this. Toko Urjan
Rinpoche has so many books on this. Shogya Omka Nourba Rinpoche has so many books on
this. Ven. Rinpoche is in all of their books, they say the same thing. That's one of the
qualities of Vajrayana. A distinction between Sutraana and Vajrayana is the cause. A cause
has the same nature as a result. So instead of thinking that right now something's broken,
like in me, the result is already the same nature as the cause. If Buddha nature's true,
then enlightened nature, if Buddha nature is true, the enlightened nature is here and
it's what I am, then I don't have to wait a long time to awaken it. It's already here.
I just have to see it. We just have to recognize it. We just have to kind of look for ourselves.
And then Vajrayana becomes easy. That's what we try to do at the beginning of every sadhana.
It's what we're really encouraged to do. All these great masters, they're really not trying
to just have us have repu, where we have all these repetitions and we've done all these
things. It's trying to recognize our mind right now and again and again and again. And
they're so kind that these great enlightened beings keep showing up and they keep doing
things and giving us an opportunity to recognize the nature of my mind right now. Okay, so
say someone can do that for once, for a few minutes, for a few days. Then the teacher's
going to come and say, "Can you do it now?" And they're going to do something. And it's
going to activate something in us. "Oh no, I'm so bad. I'm the best. Oh no, what's going
on? I'm confused." Right? People who've been around Vajrayana, they know this. And it's
look now. That's what it is. Look now. Do you have an open mind now? Because when the moment
of death comes or when big societal collapse comes and the big, all these really serious
suffering things are happening, right? Obviously, personally in our lives and on bigger scales.
When those things come, look to the mind. And if we can do that, then all these other Vajrayana
claims become self-evident. Maybe. More than maybe. Probably. Oh, it's probably true that
the Buddha taught Vajrayana before even he was in India. It's probably true that I could
get enlightenment in this single lifetime if I really put my mind to it. It's probably
true. And we're trying to get this type of certainty, a really heartfelt conviction whereby
looking really clearly and closely at our own minds and in our own habits and really
again and again in the nature of our mind. Activate bodhicitta. Activate bodhicitta.
We're trying to get this certainty that no matter what happens, we won't waver. We still
will stay with our nature of bodhicitta. Absolute bodhicitta, relative bodhicitta in their union.
We can call it so many things and these great masters did. According to the readiness of
beings, whatever helps pop that light on for all these beings, they taught all these teachings,
84,000 teachings. All different paths to just recognize the same thing are what is the nature
of my mind right now. And then Vajrayana is one of its distinct points of being so easy.
It's known as the path of skillful means. If the nature is already there in our minds,
if the nature of everything is fundamentally good, fundamentally free beyond all categorization,
beyond any way we want to chop it up and hold on for a reference system so we can feel comforted,
if the nature is already actually open, then we can use anything to reconnect to that nature.
We can use the internet, we can use food, we can use making money, losing money, getting
happy, sunshine, internet fails, no water doesn't turn on, tap, no electricity, Netflix
down, sickness, old age, death. The range of skillful means is so incredible for Vajrayana
because in Sutra Mahayana the view is already taught by the Buddha in Sutra Mahayana, it's
great Madhyamaka going beyond all conceptual designations in any fixation on there being
an inherent existence. The simple way to put this is everything changes, literally everything,
all minds, all material, all felt sense of self, all felt sense of other, it all changes
all the time, it's fundamentally illusory. The Buddha taught that in the Sutra Mahayana.
There's all these additional techniques the Buddha taught as Garimbice, and it's all these
great beings with Tantra Mahayana, the soak ceremony that we do regularly, reciting mantras,
dedicating a portion of money we make for Dharma activities so that our profession can
always be looped into a Dharma activity, put five dollars away every week just to sponsor
someone for a retreat or something. Then your whole career becomes a Dharma activity, rejoicing
in other beings happiness, rejoicing in the good things we do, confessing having bi-weekly
confessions of the mistakes we make and forgiving each other. These Sangha ceremonies on the
tenth and twenty-fifth days, all these skillful means are available to reconnect to our nature
of mind and that and others. It becomes so easy. We don't have to fixate so much on what
to accept and what to reject, but it comes down to the point of actually nature of mind.
So if we take this seriously, there's these living masters that can help us see that and
not just see it but get more familiar with it and not just get kind of familiar, become
really certain about it, rain or shine. Whether we're on our first prostration or our hundred
thousandth prostration or whether something just someone just said something shocking
or someone just said something so loving, then we're trying to keep connecting to this
nature. That's the path. It's really the practice. And that's all we'll just keep doing it and
these great we have such a great fortune. These masters will keep using all the skillful
means available. Mundane ones, lineage ones, you know, traditional ones, really unexpected
ones and they'll keep introducing us that, oh, we're, you know, just like a mirror, right?
You're fundamentally good. All that is so interesting comes to mind this idea of acceptance.
So many people, there's so many near death stories. It's so interesting. This is popping
in my mind right now. There's so many near death experiences. And a lot of people come
back and they really just really they come back in a hospital situation without going
into all these details. They come back and they say so many similar things. And one of
the similar things that a lot of people report is, is the first time I felt really accepted.
They're dying, dead. Somehow there's some experience of like just being seen fully and
without any manipulation or any, any judgments, just full acceptance. And it's really similar
what we're trying to do in Badriana. This is our nature. I fully accept it. This is
your nature. I fully accept it. That's where I'm going to begin every moment. See you as
a Buddha, see me as a Buddha. And if we have to fake it to make it and take little steps
and think a Buddha and like try to visualize and make all these additional skillful means
to orient our minds so that we can relax and just accept that fact, that the Buddha nature
is already there, then we use whatever we can. That's the path. But the path is the
path and the result is the result. And the path is the skillful means and the result
is actually being in our nature. That's the principle point, which is a really key point.
The point of Buddhism is not to stay on the path. The point of Buddhism is to realize
the result and the result is realized by whatever path gets you there. And the easiest, quickest,
most lightning fast view is you're already there because the nature of the cause and
the result is both emptiness, lack of inherent existence and beyond all conceptual designation.
And just saying that and just repeating the words or something, that's easy. Anyone can
do it, an AI robot can do it. But actually abiding in Borichitta, then we're in the result
right now and then it's not in the path. Then we're in the fruition and then if our recognition
kind of closes and stops, then we use a skillful means to reconnect. The moment we think we're
not enlightened, we create the need for a path because we don't see truly, we don't see the
fact of the matter that that's the enlightened nature. We don't see it, so ignorance happens
and then we need a path to re-recognize the skillful means path. And Balcherana has so
many skillful means. It's a function of our own occluded seeing that we can't yet reveal.
We can't disclose our nature right now. So we need all these techniques and Vajrayana
is filled with techniques. So the great master of Amalamitra, also he taught that one, Vajrayana
is so incredible and extraordinary because there's so many skillful means, which I very
kind of casually threw things out in like a very random list. And two, instead of believing
that we're broken, we can actually use our destructive emotions for what they are, that
energetic expression of our mind. We don't have to see them as enemies to get rid of.
We actually can use them. That's like poison as medicine, right? This is very typical Vajrayana
view. Then three, it's easy because we don't have to give up the luxuries of the six sense
pleasures from the Vajrayana view. We can use them like food offering. We eat food and
make a Ganachakra offering as we eat. And so there's so much merit involved in that practice.
And then four, it's so swift. Let's say, Balamitra said, and this isn't from the clear lamp,
his teaching called the clear lamp. It's so swift because if we recognize our nature right
now, then the path is already, it's instantly done. We're at the result. And then we keep
reintroducing that to ourselves every day with Sadhna practice, doing, going for refuge, generating
bodhicitta, doing our nandra sessions, doing whatever practices we're working. All we're
doing is reintroducing what a teacher already showed us in us. We're just reintroducing it.
And then we check in with a teacher. If we get confused or lost or like kind of the thrill
is gone, you know, and we can't kind of see clearly, then a teacher so kindly will help
us see it again. They'll fully accept our nature as we, in all this human baggage that
we come with, which is beautiful. They're not going to throw out all the ways we show
up as human beings. They're going to use that because they're great Vajrayana masters. So,
I mean, from my own mind, when I hear, oh, this is, Vajrayana is the easy path, then
the doubt can really come up, you know? What do you mean easy? I've put some years into
this. It's really hard. All this, get this sickness and have to keep doing the things
and struggling, struggling, all these things. So then it's like, well, how is it easy path?
Then we can't miss these key points. We can't because we just waste a lot of time and then
a life will go, you know? We have to get really familiar with them. We really do. I mean,
this is a practitioner, so we can really help serve other beings. I'm, like, throwing some
words around, like, very casually in one way. But in another way, a lot of this is really
technical. All this, I'm saying, really is a union of rangtong, shantong and zogchen
perspectives taught by Mipham Rinpoche. I'm not trying to break down all the analysis
of how it's empty of, like, ego fixation and empty of the adventitious obscurations and
totally full with all the perfected qualities already accomplished spontaneously right now.
But if we really look at these teachings, we can go into the depths and really technically
pick this stuff apart as a rangtong, shantong and zogchen, mahamudra unions. And I've said
it all, you know, and these great masters, they've said this so many times, all these
things, but we have to make more familiar with these maps and then also with our own
direct personal experience. But just as Vajrayana is just this giant kind of display of using
all of experience as the path to reintroduce the nature, it can be, it makes sense that
we get lost sometimes, or it's confusing, it's overwhelming, it's just so much. How
do we fit all this together? The principle point really comes down to nature of mind.
So we really should come back to that as much as we can. Find a teacher, a living teacher,
a living teacher with lineage. And then really genuinely ask them, what can I do to do this?
How can I make myself ready to actually recognize this? If this is true, if it's possible that
my nature could be enlightened, what can I do? And that teacher, that's all they want
to do is help beings, they'll help you. And even if it doesn't make sense so clearly,
or it's not, they'll help us learn to stand on our own two feet, where we don't depend
on all these things to feel happy. They say not so sensitive like a blade of grass in
the wind, just moves here and there, sunshine, happy, you know, rainy, sad. Like Longchampa
again said, Oh, when we're, you know, on the beach hanging out, you know, we're great practitioners
,
but when something goes wrong, then we're not practitioners at all. The nature of mind
is the same in all these cases. So I'm not saying that because I recognize that because
I'm in no way claiming that. But sitting here at the feet of great noble beings of Venerable
Camperum, which is they're saying this again and again and again and again and again, pick
up one of their books, these unrestricted books, they introduce it again and again and again
almost every chapter. So this is really like kind of an interesting time. The seal is kind
of broken on this. Like there's so many techniques for us to recognize this. There's so much
study. There's so many living teachers. There's so much we can do to support if we're really
curious and open minded about this possibility of maybe I'm enlightened already. Maybe this
nature is enlightened. Maybe you have enlightened nature. There is so much that would support
that inquiry and that adventure right now. We're really in this time where everything
is at our disposal. And once these teachings of the Buddha Shakyamuni conclude, like after
he said about 5,000 or so years, for all the next Buddha's of this fortunate Aeon, the
next 996 Buddhas, they won't say a single word about Vajrayana publicly. So we have
some 2,400 years left where we can actually make this a living experience and use these
teachings to really get realization and like really get acceptance and certainty that this
is our nature. This is the nature of all experience. It's fundamentally good. It is open and it's
creative. It is loving and it's caring and it's fully embraced and inclusive in all ways
beyond any conception we could have about it is Buddha nature. So we're in this kind
of amazingly fragile, very small window in cosmological time to receive these teachings
and to get together and practice them all together. It almost never happens. It happens
in Daewa Chin every day, every moment, but I'm not in Daewa Chin yet. I'm really praying
to get there. But right now, it's all up for us. Everything is in our favor. That's it.
I'm trying to list some key things that have helped me over the years kind of stay on track
a little bit and I'm still not on track, I would say, but like to help kind of avoid
some things or kind of get, you know, get myself out of the ditch in some ways like
Tibetan Buddhism really isn't about Tibet. And at the same time, homage to Tibet, homage
to any mother India, homage to this stainless noble lineage of masters. Without them, we
would be lost as Vajrayana practitioners because we're just not ready to see the teachings
that are always happening all the time. We're not ready. We're not clear enough to see it
happening all the time. So I'm going to last point. As a secular approach, what does this
sound like, you know? What is omniscience in a secular language? When we experience things,
there's no noise. It's all signal. Everything is an avenue towards awakening. It's not like,
oh, big samsara, all these crazy things. Where's the truth? How do I make sense? What am I
doing next? Where's the signal? From a Tibetan Buddhist perspective, everything is telling
us to wake up. Every experience, every emotion, everything that we hear, any thought that
we have, it is all only signal. There is no noise. The Buddha said they looked throughout
all of cosmic universes and they couldn't find a single speck of suffering. It's all
only pure. It is all perfect signal. Then the question is making ourselves ready to actually,
are we willing to consider that possibility? This is all awakened experience, all of body,
speech, and mind, all form, sound, and space, all thoughts, all emotions. They all are the
enlightened nature because this is where Vajrayana Buddhism begins.
As a point, I wanted to highlight really for myself and then hopefully that's helpful.
This is totally doable. These living masters are here and we're so fortunate to be a part
of these living lineages and these terma traditions and kama traditions that are still being turned
in this very moment with our own experience and also with these great living beings. I
know I'm kind of bouncing around in my love letter to Vajrayana Buddhism, but sometimes
it's good to just be in the soupy mix of love. I'm okay with that. I like that. I like that.
In fact, all these great masters, we look at them. What do we see in them? Do you ever
have that thing when you're like a kid and you see someone come in the room, you see
something and someone they're like, they sparkle, right? They're like, have this shine like,
"Oh, this person, they know something." They really come with some and these great masters,
they help us see what's going on there. Ooh, and we look and they help us see it in ourselves.
So this is like a love letter to the world and all of Vajrayana practitioners and all
sentient beings. We all have this nature, so there's no discrimination. These are such
standard lineage teachings, so I hope I'm not in any way trespassing or saying something
incorrectly. So check me. If this is not according to the lineage something, please check me
because I don't want to deviate from the lineage teachings. So thank you. Love you. Love you
all. Enjoy. Thank you. Thank you. Can I make a little clarification too about something
I said? I don't want to be misinterpreted. So in the point where I was talking about
how Tibetan Buddhism fundamentally has nothing to do with Tibet because the Buddha taught
that long before Vajrayana went to Tibet that at the same time, Tibet, we all owe an incredible
debt, like an unrepayable debt of kindness to all the Tibetans and the Tibetan Buddhist
masters that have preserved Vajrayana teachings, ongoing for centuries through today and into
the future. Of all the cultures, they created a culture where their streams were designed
to produce prayers and their wind was designed to produce prayers with prayer flags. And
most of their economy went to libraries and educational institutions and art projects,
painting deities, and it's a non-theistic tradition that how much resilience the Tibetans
have to forgive beings in the face of incredible tragedy, how much they intentionally left
valuable resources in the earth to maintain earth balance, the literal, the incredible
literacy rates of Tibetans for centuries. It's such a fundamentally disarmed, nonviolent
culture as cultures go. And to have bodhichitta be at the center of their culture, that's
the normative line for Tibet, bodhichitta. We owe them, it's such an incredible repository
of living lineage wisdom where they honor their elders, they dedicated so much time
to preserving centuries of tradition in informed ways that could actually benefit their people
right now on the ground. So I just don't want that to be misconstrued. It's like a living
repository of all these insights and technologies of how we can create cultures and also help
nourish current cultures all around the world to actually do something like that that Tibet
has done. So that's it. That's really important to say too. So sorry, I don't want that to
be not clear. Thank you, sorry. Thank you. Bye.